In this conflict, uh there has been an
enormous, and I would say a scary, uh
amount of missiles expended on the part
of the United States. Hundreds and
hundreds on the part of Iran lashing out
at basically all of their neighbors. And
what was once an American idiosyncrasy,
the pursuit of this missile defense
capability, is now very much a global
phenomenon. The demand signals, the
supply and demand signal of long-range
standoff
and the means to contend with it is very
much a global phenomenon.
>> You used the word scary to talk about
the sort of volume of activity the US
has or how much we fired already. What
did you mean by that?
>> part is the is the massive expenditure
of these things. And I want to quote
General Keane, uh the chairman
of the Joint Chiefs, who said who's
asked, "Do we have enough?" And he said,
"We have enough for this conflict."
That is not the same as saying that we
have enough for the other tasks that we
have around the world. Most
significantly,
uh deterring a conflict with China. And
what they're doing right now is
presiding over an extraordinary
vaporization of our inventory in a very
short uh window of time.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. [music]
>> And I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> Tracy, uh you know, I think we're
roughly maybe a little bit less than 2
weeks into the war in Iran. We are
recording this March 12th, 2026.
And there are of course extraordinary
number of questions about the timing and
the duration of the war. We know already
that the economic impact has been quite
significant, particularly if you just
look at commodity markets. But one of
the questions that sort of may help
determine timing or outcome, I guess,
you know, when we talked about this in
um
the
after the war in Ukraine started, wars
are about supply chains
>> Yeah.
>> in large sense. And quite obviously wars
are about size and scale of the arsenals
and how fast they can be replenished.
>> Right.
>> Right. Two things I know, war is
logistics.
>> Yes.
>> And also war is a racket. And the only
reason I know that is cuz I just
literally downloaded the book. So, I'll
know more about that in a second. But,
you're absolutely right. I do not like
talking about war or conflict or
military stuff in general, but I do
enjoy talking about supply chains. And
there's one crucial supply chain that we
haven't really discussed in detail ever
before, but it keeps coming up more and
more in this conflict.
>> Yeah, that's right. So, obviously, you
know, you see these numbers and I don't
know how real they are, but they're
extraordinary, you know, that it's like
Iran can launch an attack against a
military base in a nearby country, etc.
There's all this talk about the
extraordinary efficacy of cheap drones
and so forth. And then you hear about
the extraordinary cost of missile
defense.
>> Right. So, putting on our old
international relations hat.
>> Yes.
>> A lot of what we used to study was this
idea of asymmetric warfare, right? And
the classic examples that would come up
would be guerrilla warfare where, you
know, you have a a less well-equipped
army that is engaging in exhausting
skirmishes against like a
better-equipped larger army.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's a way of like offsetting their
own weaknesses against the strengths of
another force. Nowadays, we don't really
have that kind of ground conflict,
right? Knock on wood. Um but, you're
seeing it
>> Some
>> Some people say play out in this arena
of missiles, which is really where all
this conflict is playing out is in the
missile space. So, you hear these
stories about like Iran is launching
these drones that cost, I think, $25,000
a pop
>> say, yeah.
>> some of them, or putting uh mines in the
Strait of Hormuz, which are also very
cheap relative to some other tactics.
And meanwhile, you hear things like,
well, the UAE's missile defense system
costs like millions of dollars per pop,
literally per pop, against a drone. And
meanwhile, the US is firing, you know,
interceptor missiles or whatever that
cost, again, millions and millions of
dollars.
>> Yeah, and you hear and, you know, again,
the math, the sort of missile math seems
very lopsided. And then, of course, the
question is just the pure numbers. And
how many do you have and what is the
capacity to ramp up production, etc. All
huge questions that are
>> Where do your missiles actually come
from?
>> Where are they made? That's right.
There's a mommy missile and a daddy
missile.
>> Well, I was about to make a Judy Blume
joke just then, but I decided not to,
but, you know.
>> Anyway, we we have a ton of questions
and we don't have the answers, but we're
going to learn a lot. We have the
perfect guest, someone who knows about
this intimately, someone who focuses on
this entirely. We're going to be
speaking with Tom Karako, senior fellow
and director of the Missile Defense
Project at CSIS, and he's going to walk
us through all of this and how to think
about the supply chain of these
armaments. So, Tom, thank you so much
for coming on Odd Lots.
>> Hey, great to be with y'all.
>> Thank you so much. What do you tell us,
just to begin, what do you do? What is
the focus of your work?
>> Yeah, well, look, CSIS, Center for
Strategic and International Studies, I
would say is the main defense think tank
in Washington, D.C. It's been around
since,
you know,
I think the '60s and the Cold War.
And within CSIS, there's sort of the
department that focuses on hard power,
to focus on defense department-centric
things. And within that, I run the
Missile Defense Project. And so,
basically, think
mud to space,
UAVs, cruise missiles, ballistic
missiles,
space sensors, you know, everything in
that in that window, both offense and
defense, is what my team kind of
studies, writes about, comments upon,
and hosts just a a lot of events and
commentary.
>> Actually, before we even get into
missiles, this is a question I wanted to
ask, but why do we have defense think
tanks
anyway? Like, why do these exist?
Because if you think about military
conflict in the US, presumably there
should just be one actor engaged in
military conflict with other states at
any one moment of time and that's the
actual US government, the Department of
Defense  Department of War. Why
do we need private actors opining on
military uh
tactics, strategy, supply chains at all?
>> Yeah, that's that's a good question.
That's a fair question.
Uh and I think I would answer it with
what
uh folks
uh coming out of DOD always say, uh
which is it's the world's largest
bureaucracy uh and uh quite literally
they don't have time to think. That is
what That is what senior officials say
all the time. And when you go in you
also tend not to have new ideas. And so
it's it's kind of an opportunity for
idea generation. Uh and uh this is not
my uh formulation. This is what you you
frequently hear from people who go in
and out of government uh that they need
need those idea generation in a way to
be uh contracted out by those people who
have time. And so now having said that,
a lot of people who go into government
come from the think tank world. Uh come
from the policy world is what I think I
would put it rather. And uh they go out,
they think, they write some things, they
reflect on uh on things and study
things, and then they kind of perhaps go
back in to uh to uh to govern.
>> Let's talk about from the outside
perspective. You know, you try to
estimate the size of the arsenal of
various different weapons that the US
has. How transparent is the government
about the size of stockpiles and how
much is one's job from the think tank
world from the outside an exercise in
triangulation, inference, and so forth
to be able to understand these things.
And then just like after besides the
sort of uh
approach you take to measuring these
things, what are some of the numbers
that we're talking about right now?
>> Yeah, so look, uh it's going to vary um
uh case to case. Uh but I would say in
many respects, although it's the
government's job to
keep a number of things uh secret uh so
that our the bad guys don't know exactly
what we have or how many we have,
rather. I would nevertheless say that to
a very large extent, uh we are a
democracy and a lot of detail is
available in the budget books that go
over to Congress every year when the
budget request, the annual budget
request, comes out.
And so, uh there is a
pretty good amount of tracking. If you
want to understand what kind of Defense
Department you have, look at the money.
Uh and so, there's a there's a decent
amount of of information out there
about, you might say, the garden variety
missiles and the garden variety
capabilities that have to be, you know,
deliberated, appropriated by Congress,
uh and then also built uh by industry.
And so, while exact numbers are are kept
sensitive, you can get pretty close uh
in terms of these dollars,
uh and this number of rounds. Uh you you
can get uh you can get pretty close.
>> For those who haven't been following
this as intensely as you have, can you
paint a schematic of the kind of
missiles we're we're talking about when
we talk about the situation in Iran
right now? And what exactly are the
different missile types being used for?
I know guys love talking about missile
names, right? And being like armchair
military strategists, so some people
might know this already. But for the
benefit of those of us who have it, you
know, we just see a missile and it's a
missile. What are the different types
that are currently being deployed?
>> Yeah, well, look, uh first of all, you
know, what's a missile?
Uh there's uh
basically there's platforms and there's
projectiles, you know, aircraft, uh
ground vehicles, uh ships, and this sort
of thing. But basically, since the
1960s, uh there's been a high
a high degree of emphasis on essentially
guided missiles, uh
precision guided munitions of various
kinds and also a standoff capability.
And so, you know, indirect fire, uh,
cannons, guns, this kind of thing uh,
began to be replaced by much more over
the horizon capabilities that could fly
out a good ways, come back down and
especially in terms of terminal
guidance, could then find a ship on the
ocean or find uh, using terrain mapping
or what have you. So, basically since
the kind of the precision guidance
revolution in the '70s especially,
there's just been an enormous amount of
progress. And so, if and frankly this
this tech technological progress is no
longer that
uh, a monopoly of the United States as
it perhaps once was, it's ubiquitous.
Even folks like Iran and North Korea and
that kind of thing have it. And so,
that's that's the
the baseline. And so, there's look,
there's different kinds of missile-ry.
Uh, in a missile etymologically speaking
is simply that which is sent. Uh,
there's ballistic missiles uh, that fly
gravity's rainbow,
uh,
mostly unpowered for most of their
flight. Cruise missiles that are
essentially aerodynamic and use lift and
drag uh, to uh,
to travel some kind of jet engine or
what have you.
Uh, and then there's these new classes
of things that are kind of blending, you
know, people talk about hypersonic
gliders that may start off with a
ballistic push but then have the
maneuver that the speed of a ballistic
missile but the maneuverability of uh,
of a cruise missile or aircraft you
might say. And so, it's it's a rich and
diverse spectrum uh, that has emerged
over the years and and as former Biden
administration official said and I like
to repeat, missiles have truly have
become weapons of choice. Uh, it's the
thing for which we reach early and often
in a conflict and largely because of the
combination of that precision guidance
and that standoff capability. And so,
when the first Trump administration
wanted to go hit uh, Syria, you know,
they sent 59 Tomahawks. Uh, that's a
cruise missile uh, to go uh, to go get
them. And in this conflict, uh there has
been an enormous, and I would say a
scary uh amount of uh missiles expended
on the part of the United States.
Hundreds and hundreds on the part of
Iran lashing out at basically all of
their neighbors.
With a combination of ballistics
and uh
a lot of these drones are essentially
cruise missiles. When you're over 1,000
km of range, you know, it's essentially
a a cruise missile, the Shahed uh for
instance. And then you have the the
missile defense world. Uh and you know,
it wasn't that long ago when in polite
society it was it was conventional
wisdom that it was impossible to hit a
bullet with a bullet. Over the past,
especially 5 years, uh that has been
completely and utterly uh
uh refuted. And in conflict after
conflict in Ukraine, in the Red Sea
operations, in the defense of Israel a
couple times now, uh we've seen an
extraordinary uh degree of missiles
being defeated by a combination of
effects, not just missile on missile,
but combination of effects. And now, you
know, we're kind of surprised when we
miss
uh
at some of these things. And what was
once an American idiosyncrasy, the
pursuit of this missile defense uh
capability, is now very much a global
phenomenon. After the Ukraine conflict,
uh
especially in Europe, uh the European
Sky Shield initiative, Germany buying an
Israeli Arrow 3 system for ballistic
missile defense, has been a sea change.
Uh the demand signals, the supply and
demand signal of long-range standoff
and the means to contend with it is very
much a global phenomenon. Uh I'll say
that the top two priorities for aid for
Ukraine over the past 4 years were what?
Long-range fires, missiles, uh and uh
air missile defense. Uh they went so far
as to put the Patriot launcher on a on
their currency uh because it has
basically kept them uh kept them
sovereign. And these are the top two
It's fun. I've got I've got one in my
office. Um, it it's uh
>> The currency, not the missile, right?
>> I I'm still trying to buy a Patriot for
[laughter] the office. They won't let me
get one, but I'm working on it.
>> That was already extremely helpful, but
just to go back, you used the word scary
to talk about the sort of volume of
activity that the US has or how much
we've fired already. What did you mean
by that? Unpack that statement a little
bit.
>> Yeah. So, let me just say that missile
defense will not win a war for you, but
its absence will lose one or could lose
one pretty quickly. And so, I said a
moment ago that Ukraine missile defenses
helped keep Ukraine sovereign, right? If
not for being able to thwart these
incoming air and missile attacks, it
would have been a very different
situation.
Uh, let me go back to the last summer
in the hundreds of missiles, 650
projectiles from multiple parts of the
Middle East coming at Israel all at once
during the 12-day war.
If those hundreds and hundreds of
objects had arrived all at once as they
were intended to do in a place the size
of New Jersey, it would have been
catastrophic. Surprisingly enough,
almost everything was defeated. Uh, and
so, it is it is
missile defense buys time to end the
threat by other means. It does not end
the threat itself.
Now, what I said last summer after that
conflict ended, the Trump administration
basically threw the Iranians a lifeline
and said, "Hey, we're going to stop."
I said, "That's going to be a mistake."
Because what's going to happen is the
Iranians are going to rebuild, and then
we're going to come and we're going to
do this again in a year or so. And I was
wrong because it didn't take a year,
it's only 9 months. And why that matters
and why it's scary is because the It's
not about It's about capacity. Capacity
of defensive interceptors buys time. But
it takes a heck of a lot of time to
produce that capacity. And so, this gets
to the the the specter
I've got an op-ed coming out on this,
the specter of going Winchester, of
running out of defensive interceptors,
and that would be a very bad day. And
so, when you talk you you hundreds and
hundreds of missiles are going to
require hundreds of interceptors.
Uh that was last year, again this year.
And so, that's the scary part is the is
the massive expenditure of these things.
And I want to quote General Keane, uh
the chairman
of the Joint Chiefs, who said who's
asked, "Do we have enough?" And he said,
"We have enough for this conflict."
That is not the same as saying that we
have enough for the other tasks that we
have around the world. Most
significantly, uh deterring a conflict
with China. And so, we have now cut in
very substantially to our total
inventory of missile defense
interceptors. Uh the numbers the
complete numbers are not not been
released. We've done a study on this
from what it was last year, and it was a
lot.
And so, why that matters, right now
we're moving Patriots and perhaps uh
some THAAD, those those missile defense
systems, from South Korea and Japan to
the Middle East.
That's significant because their job is
to be in the Pacific and to deter,
provide a a defensive deterrent, to
Chinese adventurism uh or to North
Korean adventurism uh or what have you.
And so, you know, we've been saying
different administrations have been
saying
that we're going to pivot to the Pacific
since the Obama administration. We're
still kind of waiting uh for that to
happen. We keep We keep lurching back to
to Europe and to the Middle East. Uh in
fact, a lot of the administration
officials in this Pentagon uh have been
among those who said, "Hey, we we got to
focus on China. We got to focus on the
on the Pacific." And what they're doing
right now is presiding over an
extraordinary
vaporization of our inventory in a very
short uh window of time. And so, what I
worry about you
You've heard of the Davidson window,
former head of INDOPACOM, who said,
"Hey, he worries that China uh would be
ready to move against some of their
neighbors by 2027." What I worry about
most is that this extraordinary
expenditure of stuff
is not going to be replaced in a year,
absolutely not. And that in fact, this
may kind of be a self-fulfilling
prophecy of encouraging of tempting
China to do something
uh very bad.
>> Joe, I haven't heard the term going
Winchester or I'm Winchester for years
and years and years. Do you You remember
>> know.
>> It's running out of ammunition.
>> Yeah.
>> The only reason I know this is cuz my
dad made me watch like an inordinate
amount of military movies growing up.
But um anyway,
I'm very curious about something you
said, which is that you can't win a war
with missiles. And it it seems like
>> defense.
>> With mis- Oh, I'm sorry, with missile
defense. But with offense, presumably
you can. Which seems to be the the
strategy right now.
>> Well, and so let me speak to that. Um
they uh
the joint force of the United States uh
and uh working with Israel hit, you
know, I think it's up to 5,000 targets
within the first several days of the
war. Well, they were doing so from afar.
They were doing so from standoff. And so
while they're not releasing the numbers
of the Tomahawk missiles, of the JASSM,
uh of the LRASMs and such, they're not
releasing those, one may easily surmise
that a significant number of those
targets were serviced by these
long-range things, of which we have
finite quantities. And so the offensive
strike capabilities is also
even more important as a deterrent, and
we are chewing those up uh by at least
the many hundreds, and it may, I
suspect, turn out to be thousands. And
that's That's also part of the scary
part.
>> Can you give a little bit more detail
on, I guess, the procurement process for
different types of missiles? Because I'm
very curious about the thinking that
goes behind, you know, someone saying
that we want to have this many
long-range offensive missiles versus
this many, you know, maybe shorter-range
defensive missiles. How do those
decisions actually get made?
>> Uh that's a good question. You know, it
fundamentally comes down to an idea
an idea of the order of battle of how a
conflict may play out. And so, you know,
this is the job of the
military planners and the joint staff to
kind of think that through and and
hypothesize this is how many how many
missiles we would need to have in
theater, how many aircraft, how many
ships, and this is how we might be able
to marshal a force. And conversely, how
we think the other side might be able to
marshal their
marshal their forces. I will say that
uh the Ukraine conflict especially
made folks realize that our estimates of
what we would likely need were
dramatically too low. And so, I'm just
going to give one example, but I think
you're going to see this and in fact you
there are news developments over the
past year that gratify this in different
ways that in April of last year
the US Army
quadrupled its objective acquisition
number of how many Patriot PAC-3
missiles it needed to buy
over the over the next coming years.
Quadrupled that number from like 3,000
something to 13,000 something.
And I think but kind of behind the
scenes you're seeing a recognition that
as we've seen the Ukrainians and the
Russians use enormous numbers of
projectiles, of missiles of different
kinds
kind of a sinking in that oh, in an
actual conflict this would ramp up
dramatically. And so, even before the
12-day or last summer
uh between Israel and Iran and our being
involved, even before that,
uh the Pentagon began to do a few things
some really important things. The Biden
administration had been ramping up
uh ramping up a number of missiles of
offensive and defensive of various
stripes. You probably remember the
discussion about ATACMS and whether we
could spare any ATACMS to give to
Ukraine. And the Biden administration
didn't at first and then they eventually
did. Uh that was true with a lot of uh
munitions over the past uh past four
years. Uh
flash forward to last or spring
uh incoming uh Deputy Secretary Steve
Feinberg, who comes out of the private
capital world as as your listeners no
doubt know,
um
came in and began to call in the CEOs of
a number of defense companies. And I
will say metaphorically grabbed them by
the lapels and shook them
to say, "We need to maximize
production." You know, I I respect his
respect for hard power. And over the
next six months, from a basically
Memorial Day last year, over the next
six months, you began to see a lot of
drills and a lot of
uh
figuring out of just how many Tomahawks
and all these offensive and defensive
missiles
and how much solid rocket motor
production we could do on and on. And so
over the past two months, since in
January and February of this year,
the all that work was basically
publicized and at least in press
releases. It said that Raytheon would
ramp up five munitions. There's There's
more to come, by the way. Lockheed
announced THAAD and PAC-3 Patriot that
they were going to quadruple THAAD
uh and go on the Patriot side from 600 a
year to 2,000 a year in production. And
we're going to go from, by the way, from
Tomahawk cruise missiles from 57
requested last year, which is a
pittance, to their goal is 1,000 a year
of Tomahawks. And what I would say is
that those are all very sensible moves,
very belated, by the way,
uh that
uh are
properly allowing the lessons of the
past
uh couple years to to be applied. Break.
That was all before we went to war with
Iran.
>> [gasps]
>> And so now the ramp, let's call it
munitions ramp, hasn't yet begun. And
the other kind of scary thing is it
hasn't begun because the money wasn't
there and the appropriations bill that
came out in January of I guess became
law in early February last month. The
the report language said, "Oh, by the
way, we know, we Congress the
appropriators know that this
appropriation is 28.8 billion with a B
short of what the Pentagon requested
just for munitions."
And so there's a couple things going on
here. One, we already had that 28
billion and change shortfall for FY 26.
And then
and because of that we can't put things
on contract adequately to start this
seven-year
seven-year process that is a good plan,
very good plan.
And on now we have just gone and
vaporized many billions of dollars and
and hundreds and probably thousands of
missiles over the past 2 weeks. And so
you put that together
and it's not a very good picture. And so
at the very minimum Congress is going to
have to step up, I believe, and
for munitions supplement in the very
near term.
>> Let's talk about the binding constraint
to really ramping up production because
there's clearly the political constraint
and by political I mean appropriations.
Votes have to happen to say we're going
to allocate these dollars to
defense. Okay, we understand that part,
there's politics that's difficult. Let's
talk about the binding physical
constraint. So when you say, "Okay, you
want to go from 57 to 1,000." What are
we talking about in terms of the
facilities that we have, the natural
resources? I imagine rare earth metals
and certain key commodities may be choke
choke points or bottlenecks in this
process. We all would love, I presume,
to have an infinite number of missile
defense you know, missile defense
capabilities, etc. We would like to not
have to choose between Korea and the
Middle East or the Gulf allies and so
forth. But what are the physical
constraints as you see them to ramping
up production?
>> Yeah, well you you mentioned there uh
unlimited supply. Uh if I'm not
mistaken, there was a
uh a a presidential tweet uh the other
day saying that we had a virtually
unlimited supply and I would just say
that that is a
a statement that is problematic. Uh
well, the reality
So so look, you just listed off
facilities,
uh long lead items uh for production.
And you got to like uh supply chain
issue. There's also people. Uh there's
also the workforce. You know, there's
basically one
facility in Tucson, Arizona that cranks
out uh Tomahawks, for instance. There's
a small number of things. And so
actually, when you start looking at the
the supply chain, it is
in in surprising degree, and there's
been a number of of papers written on
this, although there's a lot more to
to ascertain, is there's a lot of
bottlenecks, so there's a lot of sole
source for some widget.
And who to the Pentagon's credit, over
the past several years, there's been a
lot of, I would say, not I navel-gazing
is is is a bad term, but a lot of
introspection.
Trying to figure out and understand,
to at least truly intellectually
understand, what is the supply chain.
And there's still some opacity to that.
But nevertheless, the primes, the
defense prime companies,
and the department have been looking
into this, and I think has been
illuminating in terms of the bottlenecks
and and sole source issues. And so
you've seen, for instance, a
a I would say a a series of experiments
trying to A, get private capital
involved, the office of strategic
capital. And when that was first being
stood up, I asked the guy in charge of
it, I said, "I really want to know one
thing. Are you going to be big enough to
matter?"
You know, America's
uh asymmetric advantage, to use that
phrase, America's asymmetric advantage
is we're a wealthy country, but we have
to leverage that private wealth. Uh Uh,
I think there's a number of initiatives
on that front that will direct and are
helping to direct private capitals to
the supply chains uh for things that
matter to defense. The other thing
a a couple of experiments going on here
are investment in for instance solid new
solid rocket motor uh producers.
Everybody knows SpaceX and space launch
uh side of the things.
There's also a lot of kind of new
startup companies for solid rocket
motors. Uh I think this is good. I think
this is necessary and if they are big
enough to matter then we should
absolutely be doing all that. Um at the
same time there is the risk that we're
we're kind of like to say fiddling with
the bass and the treble knobs and not
turning up the volume. And that
essentially means there's two big
companies that do uh SRMs solid rocket
motors and one of them just got a
billion-dollar equity stake investment
by uh the Pentagon. Uh that is L3 Harris
that had had uh Aerojet as a subsidiary.
The other big one of course is is
Northrop Grumman uh which owns and has
subsumed uh Orbital ATK in the past. And
so on the solid rocket motor front um
there's these experiments going on and
these investments. The Biden
administration put $216 million into
into Aerojet in Camden, Arkansas. Uh
which is actually one of the handful of
places where we uh we kind of keep it
away from
polite society that want big things
blowing up uh near cities which is one
of the challenges of production as well.
A third ex- type of experiment and this
is coming out of Steve Feinberg in
particular is that in this plan this um
uh initiative to get this munitions ramp
he's doing something very different
which is he's asking the primes to lean
in on their own dime.
And which when I say lean on on their
own dimes I mean a lot of dimes because
we're talking about double-digit
billions. He's basically asking the
companies to pony up out of their
internal funds, publicly traded
companies again.
>> Yeah.
>> Um to to on spec began to invest in
these facilities. Now, if you're a
publicly traded company, that's that's
sticking your neck out. And there has
been the customer here, the DOD is a
monopsony
in terms of buying things that blow up.
The customer has not been very reliable
over the years. And of all the things
the DOD buys, munitions has been a sine
wave, up and down, lots of very
cyclical. And so that hurts the the
certainty of industry to be able to
invest and hire
uh and buy long lead items, etc. And
that's why you need multi-year
procurement. That's why you need a
7-year window. And that's why this whole
munitions plan makes sense if we can get
it off the ground.
>> Uh Joe, I was going to say we should
sound the monopsony klaxon, but I don't
think we want any loud noises on a
podcast about missiles. Um Tom, what
about if we can't ramp up production
really quickly? There are existing
missiles out there, although to your
point, there's a dwindling stockpile.
But are missiles like, I don't know,
shoes or a jacket? Can you just like tap
your allies and say, "Well, we loaned
you a missile, can we have it back and
and use it now?" And then if so, what
does that actually mean for some of our
allies who are still engaged in conflict
like Ukraine? I see there's a there's a
headline out there right now saying that
in recent weeks Ukraine's F-16 jets have
been starved of US-made missiles. And
now we have other allies like the Gulf
States who need some of their missiles
more than ever.
>> You raise a really good point, and I'll
tell you, if I had a nickel for every
time
uh the Trump administration 1.0 or 2.0
said to our allies, "Hey, you need to
spend more on defense. You need to be
buying more American." There was just an
executive order a couple weeks ago
saying, you know, "We shall use the sale
of American weapons to our allies as an
instrument of foreign policy. I mean,
we're we've always kind of done that
basically since forever. But it was, you
know, a little bit of chest beating and
saying, "Hey, you you our friends need
to buy more American uh made products."
And there's good reason for that.
America makes the best of the kind of
exquisite crown jewels capabilities for
seekers and things that that hit bullets
with bullets.
Uh to be sure.
Um but there is also a problem. Look,
there are uh 18 countries. There used to
be 19. Now 18 countries that operate the
Patriot uh missile uh defense system
globally.
And the Biden administration had to
suspend
the deliveries of Patriot missiles to
basically everybody
uh couple years back because they had to
send more to Ukraine. Right? So,
in terms of our allies, it's actually
that
on the one hand we're telling them buy
more of American stuff.
Uh and then the second thing is, "Oh,
but we might not be able to fulfill your
orders of the things you already
bought." Like, that's the problem.
That's that's one of the big reasons why
this ramp needs to happen. It's not
merely for US
US needs, but also for to provide us the
uh deliveries that we want our friends
and allies to uh to be equipped with.
And we want them to to buy it not not
just because we have a some some
commercial interest. A lot of times US
taxpayer ends up putting the bill for
some of these things. But because we
want interoperability. We want Australia
and Japan to be operating Tomahawk with
Aegis destroyers. So, that our Aegis
destroyers and our Tomahawk weapon
system, they can all work together uh
and and the whole be more than the more
than the sum of its parts. So,
there has been a lot of leaning on the
Europeans
to send stuff to the Ukrainians. And
look, it is their backyard, so it kind
of makes sense for them to be ponying up
uh on on for their security.
You know, the Poles Poland
uh remembers the Soviet boot quite well.
And they and a handful of other
countries have been especially at the
tip of the forefront to help
to help the Ukrainians. So this is very
much a global phenomenon and there are
to your point a lot of
a lot of
entangling relationships in terms of the
deliveries of of systems, the
acquisition of systems, you know,
Denmark for instance just
decided they were going to buy a French
SAMP/T air defense system rather than
Patriot. Not because Patriot was better
and and frankly it wasn't because of the
whole Greenland thing. It was because of
schedule because there's a long queue of
partners that that want that stuff and
sometimes you need stuff sooner as
opposed to the best.
>> At the very beginning we talked about
the asymmetry of these very ostensibly
very cheap drones and very expensive
missile defense and you just think if
they're really if the drones are as
cheap as advertised, there could just be
quite a lot of them and you could chew
through that missile defense. How do you
talk to us about that math? How real are
these numbers that you see like $20,000
drone versus $4 million
defense missile cuz that seems pretty
brutal, but how do you see that
equation?
>> I have to say that has to be the most
repeated cliche
that's put out there, the most repeated
headline.
You know, I think the Iranian Shaheds
are a little bit more than 20,000. Of
course there's lots of really super
small short-range stuff, but when
they're talking about going a couple
thousand kilometers,
I think the number is quoted at
somewhere
50 and 80,000.
There's some poetic justice that
we captured some of those Shaheds and an
American company reverse engineered
them. They're called Lucas.
Lucas drones and we sent some some of
them back at Ukraine. And the the quoted
cost for that I think was I think it was
$30,000. So, that's good. You need
affordable mass, you need a treatable
mass. And so, that phenomenon look,
Ukraine is producing millions millions
per year of Now, many of them are very
very small, but millions of drones. I
mean, it's it's darkening the sky
as it were. Most of them don't last very
long. Most of them may only fly once for
instance. And so, that is certainly a
phenomenon
major a major trend. But, you know,
going back to the
the cost per round. People like to count
the cost of a missile because it's kind
of easy to count. The things are harder
to count that are frankly bigger is
often the massive quantities of jet fuel
that are used to drop much cheaper
gravity bombs. And so, I think it is
actually
rather misleading to just look at the
the cost of the Patriot or the cost of
the standard missile or what have you.
You know, if you had to throw a thousand
drones to have the same effect as one
1,200 km range Tomahawk missile. You
might not even be able to get there.
Tomahawk missiles are longest range
missile and it's got 500 lb warhead.
These drones don't have that kind of
warhead, so therefore they don't have
the kind of effect. So, there's a really
comes down to what is it you're trying
to do and oh by the way, it's the
platforms and it's the whole operational
cost
that matters including by the way, the
cost of operational failure. You know, I
like to say I've had plenty of admirals
say this on stage with me at CSIS over
the years cuz I always ask this this
point. A ship captain when he sees a
cruise missile coming into his ship is
not going to pull out his slide rule or
his pocket calculator and say, "What's
the cost of that Houthi drone and what
is the cost of the missile we're going
to do that?" No.
They're going to protect the ship.
They're going to go for mission success.
And so, now you you say, "Well, that's
that's value versus cost." And that's
that's true. But, the cost the real cost
of the Iran operation
is not going to be the munitions. It's
going to be the enormous steaming of the
USS Ford from Venezuela
to the Middle East. It's it's going to
be the people and all of the jet fuel
and all of these other things. And by
the way, the facility repair
uh
those things are going to eclipse the
the cost of the munitions. So,
nevertheless, defense is hard. It is
hard to uh to hit an incoming screaming
reentry vehicle from
1200 km away, for instance.
Uh and so, defensive interceptors are
going to be more expensive than
offensive ones. Uh that's just a fact.
And that's again why missile defenses
won't win a war. They can only buy you
time to win that to end the threat by
other means. And that's why you have all
these uh all these other things as well.
As I like to say, you could throw a
thousand
UAVs into the sky and it won't do the
job of a single Patriot interceptor uh
because capability matters, too.
>> So, you mentioned ending the threat just
then. And this is the other big question
that I and I imagine a lot of other
people have at the moment. With with a
ground conflict, you can kind of
envision an end point where, you know,
an army comes marching into a state
capital and that's pretty much the end
of the conflict. With missile warfare,
it seems like it can go on for
a very long time. And I'm not quite sure
what the defining point is at which two
sides basically say, "Okay, we're done
now. Someone's won and someone's lost."
>> Yeah, well, that was the case in the
1980s between the between Iran and Iraq
for instance. Lots of lots of missiles
going back and forth.
So, you've hit on a a a couple important
points there. One, as is often observed,
it's really hard to do everything with
air power. Uh It's hard to know if you
have destroyed things on the ground
without being there.
And that's why I said, you know, there
there is at least going to be the need,
whether that need is met or not, there's
going to be the need to have some forces
on the ground. Could be special forces,
could be partners from other countries.
Uh but there's going to be that felt
need to figure out did we hit that
underground missile city, uh for
instance. Uh
point two, uh you know, everybody,
myself, others were getting nervous when
day by day would go on and the Iranians
kept launching. So, the the good news is
that the curve is flattening.
There's a phrase from the COVID COVID
years. Got to flatten the curve of of
the rate of fire. And so, you take a
look at the the the press conferences,
that's a very good development. That
they've gone from hundreds a day to, you
know, smaller numbers.
And that [clears throat] has permitted,
uh
above all, uh
uh excuse me, that has that reflects
that we are somehow doing something,
hitting the launchers, hitting the
missiles, hitting the command and
control, or at least the commanders, the
perhaps decentralized commanders. Uh
that is that is a good sign.
And add to that that we've now gotten
This is the two most important words
from one of the recent press releases
from Chairman General Keane, is he said
the words munitions transition.
Which is to say, uh
we don't have to keep using
1,000 km range Tomahawks cuz the
Iranians don't have air defenses
anymore. We can use gravity bombs, of
which we they are plentiful. Still had
to fly them back and forth, and that's
not cheap, but you still but you can you
can fly back your JDAMs, your small
diameter bombs. And there was a press
release, I think over the weekend, that
we were transferring a bunch of
munitions to Israel. And when you look
at it, and you look at what's in that
list, it was gravity bombs. And the
reason that we've gotten there is we no
longer have to do the stand-off stuff.
That's good. We can now do the stand-in,
you know, flying over top and dropping
things. But to your point, it's still
hard to do all that from the air, and
there is going to be that uncertainty,
which is why frankly
you're not going to have perfect
military certainty from the air.
To really end this, you're going to have
to have like I would say a political
change.
>> Tom Karako, thank you so much for coming
on Odd Lots. I learned a lot from this.
Really appreciate you taking your time.
>> Thanks all. Really enjoyed it.
>> Thanks Tom. Appreciate it. You're
Winchester with words.
>> All right, yeah. I never heard that
phrase, going Winchester. That's like a
That comes up in movies.
>> You know, my dad's He flew B-52 bombers
in Vietnam, so I
Yeah, I have a very mixed feelings about
all of this.
>> Defense procurement strikes me as an
extremely difficult,
I don't know, game theory equilibrium
problem to get right. And you know, you
because you have the monopsony buyer.
The It's a monopsony buyer, but it's
also political, and the political winds
are going to change. You have, you know,
companies that are naturally
profit-seeking and profit-maximizing.
And many of them, and he alluded to
this, we didn't talk about it that much,
are monopoly sellers, right? Like if
there's one component if there and we
know all about how with advanced supply
chains of complicated things, you might
have million or thousands of parts that
go into it, and some of these parts may
be produced by one company. Maybe
there's like a shiny mirror or something
somewhere that's only produced by one
optical factory somewhere in the United
States. Then you have the Buy American
requirements, so that further narrows
supply chains, etc. So you have
monopolies and monopsonies facing off,
and then, you know, how do you get to
sustain spending, sustain procurement
through the ebbs and tides of a war?
Extremely difficult challenge.
>> It's it's such a weird ecosystem of
players in military procurement. And the
other thing is like most of the time
what you're planning for is a
hypothetical Yeah. conflict, right? If
an actual conflict emerges, then I I
guess you have some more certainty to a
degree about what you need to actually
fight it. But, you know, if just a few
years ago, if you're sat there and
you're going like should we be buying
stuff for war with Iran? Should we be
buying stuff for China doing something
with Taiwan? Like these are very
different theaters of war. And I imagine
that if you're a procurement officer,
like
the temptation must be to you always
want to have the best like newest
shiniest stuff. And so I'm just
fascinated by how people actually make
those decisions in the face of both
monetary limits and physical reality and
political reality as well, which we kind
of we we glided past, but for obvious
reasons.
>> Have you seen the photos? I mean there
are photos of uh US packing up uh THAAD
missile defense systems from South
Korea.
>> I have not seen that.
>> Yeah, you just search for it. It's kind
of it it feels very
when you see the photos, it you do not
feel like oh we're a major superpower.
It's like oh here are these missiles.
Sorry, we're we're taking we have to
move them elsewhere because we don't
have enough right now. It's pretty it's
pretty shocking, but you know, like it's
it's hard it's hard to argue against the
fact that we seem to be spread very thin
these days. The war in Iran the war in
Ukraine continues to go on. Obviously,
there's this new war in Iran. And then
as you mentioned, you know, at least
since the Obama administration, they've
been talking about the pivot to Asia and
so forth and we that keeps not
happening, but there are obligations on
the ground there. Um
the whole thing seems spread very thin.
>> War is logistics and a racket.
>> Yeah.
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy
Alloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stallwart. Follow our guest
Tom Keurko. He's at Tom Keurko. Follow
our producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Armond, Dash Bennett at Dashbot, and
Keil Brooks at Keil Brooks.
>> And if you want more Odd Lots content,
you should check out our daily
newsletter. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/odd
lots.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
including defense 24/7 in our discord
with fellow listeners discord.gg/odd
lots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]